The Tutinama is a collection of stories that was illustrated during the Mughal reign of
Akbar in the 16th century. Akbar used this project to blend Indian, Islamic, and Persian
artistic styles of Central and Western Asia. While Indo-Persian painting styles were
active in Mughal courts before the Tutinama, Akbar’s efforts are notable in the
development and unification of distinct Mughal artistic and aesthetic style.
One day, a rich Iranian merchant leaves on a business trip. His wife Khojisteh is bored at
home and wants to indulge in a love affair to pass the time. One night she goes to
her Parrot who says, “I will send you to your lover but first the story of the King and
his daughter.” Let us begin in the King’s court. The King sits on a throne
a central and elevated position. The surrounding figures in his line of sight have bowed
heads while other figures are occupied providing him shade or assistance highlighting
their subservience. The King wears an elaborate and bright orange robe and is the only
figure with a feather in his turban which highlights his distinguished, authoritative, and
regal position. Across the illustrations, figures of higher rank and within court
positions wear long white sashes around the waist like a decorative belt. The males within
court wear sashes with red and black stripes, including the King. In contrast, the only
figure that does not wear a belt is the Dervish, highlighting his lowly, outsider status.
A Dervish is a devotee who takes vows of poverty and austerity in the Sufi Muslim faith.
These belts could signify collective identity, membership, and even rank within the royal
court. The King had a daughter who was all fairness and beauty. One day, a
Dervish saw the daughter and fell mad with love and passion. He went to the King and said
‘I must have your daughter.’The King, you can imagine, was livid. He called to
his advisor, “How dare someone so poor think he can have my daughter! Punish him.” Here
the King is standing and is drawing his sword in what appears to be a challenge to a dual.
The King and his mace bearer are lunging forward which creates a sense of motion and
urgency. In contrast, the Dervish is chained around his neck and carries no weapons. He is
wearing very little clothing and no shoes. The clothing he does wear has a very muted
brown and grey color palette. His head covering is leopard print and is one piece rather a
wrapped turban.  These contrasts to the King’s bright, ornate robes highlight a stark
difference social position and authority. “Perhaps I can get him to leave the city some
other way?” The King agrees to the plan and the advisor calls for the lovesick Dervish.
“You know that there must be some kind of exchange. It’s just how these marriages go. If
you can bring an elephant load of gold, the king’s daughter is yours.”
The Dervish looks around ‘I have no gold, but people talk of the generosity of the Prince
of Princes. Simply ask for what you need, and he will bestow it on you.”
He goes to the Prince who listens to his case. “This seems like a worthy cause. Here’s the
gold. Good luck.” And the Dervish returns to the King.
the King sighed, “Well, this did not go according to plan.” “Well done!” says the
advisor, “But now the king needs the head of the Prince of Princes!”
The Dervish returns and pleads with the Prince “He now wants your head! What am I to do?
This woman is all I can think of – I need her.” “Calm down,
I have a plan. See, I normally carry my head in my hand. Tie me up and carry me before
court. When they consent, make a show of cutting my head from my body. I will deal with
them if they pull any more tricks.” And so, the duo set off to court.
When they arrive, the King sees the generosity of the Prince and is amazed. “Surely,
there is no greater, wiser, or stronger man! For who would willingly give their head for
an unworthy person?! You would make a great match with my daughter!” and the King gives his daughter
over to Prince of Princes. The King and the Prince wear similar necklaces with large black
and gold adornments. In contrast to the surrounding figures, the Prince is the only one
whose eye gaze is slightly above the King of Bahilistan. He is also one of the only
characters without a weapon and yet the King determines that he is strong and powerful,
quickly ceding authority and his daughter’s hand in marriage. The narrative and
illustration highlight that the Prince has particular and self-evident influence over the
King.
“And now, my sweet Khojisteh, the story is over,” Says the Parrot.
“Do the Dervish and the daughter end up together?” She asks.
“Ah, I don't know that. You should go see your friend. He has been waiting for quite some
time.” Khojisteh goes to leave but morning has come, and her love affair is delayed
another night.